MinnowBoard Guide: Getting Started

Jayneil Dalal(jayneil.dalal@gmail.com)



Summary

In this guide, I will describe the various different features on the MinnowBoard as well as how to boot Angstrom on it. Angstrom is an embedded Linux distribution. This guide targets beginners who are just getting started with the MinnowBoard. 



Contents of the box

When you purchase a MinnowBoard, you get the following items in the box as shown in Figure -1:

1. MinnowBoard

2. 5V Power Adapter

3. 4GB micro SD card preloaded with the Angstrom Linux Distribution (Yocto Project Compatible) 

 Figure-1: Box contents



Anatomy of a MinnowBoard

This section outlines the various components on the MinnowBoard. Figure -2 below annotates the important components on the top side of the MinnowBoard.

 Figure-2: MinnowBoard top side

Figure -3 below annotates the important components on the bottom side of the MinnowBoard.

 Figure-3: MinnowBoard bottom side 



Specifications

For detailed specifications of the MinnowBoard, please visit our web site:http://www.minnowboard.org/technical-features/




Preparing the MicroSD Card

Please note that this section is completely optional. The MinnowBoard already comes with a microSD card that is preloaded with a working Angstrom Linux image. In case you want to use a newer image or want to program the microSD from scratch, this section covers it all. These steps were created using an Ubuntu 12.10 64-bit system.

Note:- This section is for Linux users only. If you are using Windows, please skip ahead to the [sec:Windows-Users] section.

• First download the latest Angstrom Linux image for MinnowBoard from the link below:

http://dominion.thruhere.net/koen/angstrom/minnow/Angstrom-development-GNOME-image-eglibc-ipk-v2012.12-minnow-2013.06.04.img.xz

At the time of writing this guide, the latest image available for download was 'Angstrom-development-GNOME-image-eglibc-ipk-v2012.12-minnow-2013.06.04.img.xz' 

• Now, identify the correct raw device name (like /dev/sde - not /dev/sde1) for your microSD card. You can do this by opening Disk Utility application (sometimes also called Disks) in Ubuntu and clicking on the microSD card entry. See the Device field to determine the raw device name of your microSD card.

NOTE TO JAYNEIL: Same note about unmounting the filesystems as I pointed out in the LED guide

• Now unpack the image to the microSD card by typing the following commands in the terminal window: 
$ xzcat Angstrom-development-GNOME-image-eglibc-ipk-v2012.12-minnow-2013.05.24.img.xz | sudo dcfldd of=/dev/sdc



Here 'sdX' stands for the device id of the microSD card.



Booting Angstrom

• First insert the card into the microSD card slot label side up as shown in Figure -4. 

 Figure-4: Connecting the micro SD card

• Next, connect an external keyboard and mouse to the MinnowBoard. Then connect a USB mini cable to your computer and the MinnowBoard as shown in Figure -5. This connection will be used to access the serial console of the MinnowBoard.

 Figure-5: Connecting a USB mini cable for serial console access

• To power up the MinnowBoard, connect the 5V/3A power supply as shown in Figure -6:

NOTE TO JAYNEIL: Confirm power supply amperage.

 Figure-6: Powering up the MinnowBoard

• Access the MinnowBoard's serial console via a terminal emulator:$ screen /dev/ttyUSB0 115200 Note:- You can also use minicom, but screen is much easier to use! Also in most cases the virtual USB serial port is ttyUSB0. If it does not work, try ttyUSB1 .

• You should see a similar Angstrom login screen as shown in Figure - 7. The username is 'root' and there is no password - just press the Enter key.

 Figure-7: Angstrom

• If you have an external display connected to the MinnowBoard via the HDMI port, you should see output similar to that shown below in Figure - 8 

 Figure-8: Angstrom

Figures - 9,10 show my setup.

 Figure-9: My Setup

 Figure-10: My Setup




Windows Users

This section is for those who are using a Windows machine to interact with the MinnowBoard. 

Serial Terminal

We will be using Teraterm as our terminal application. Please follow the steps below to set up Teraterm:

• Download the latest version of Teraterm from the link below:

http://en.sourceforge.jp/projects/ttssh2/releases/

At the time of writing this guide the latest version was 'teraterm-4.78.exe'

• Install the Teraterm software by double clicking on the exe file downloaded earlier. If it displays a security warning, accept it and click on 'Run' as shown in Figure - 11 below:

 Figure-11: Teraterm installation

• Now just follow the on-screen instructions to install the software. It is advised to do the 'full' installation instead of the 'standard' one as shown in Figure - 12 below:

 Figure-12: Perform Teraterm full installation

• Launch Teraterm. Then go to Setup>Serial port and change the settings as shown in Figure - 13 below:

 Figure-13: Teraterm Serial Port setup

• Then go to File>New connections and select the Serial option and chose the appropriate COM port as shown in Figure - 14 below

 Figure-14: Setting up a new connection

• Then connect the required accessories as described earlier in the guide and power up the MinnowBoard. If all went well, you should see a successful output in Teraterm as shown in Figure - 15 below:

 Figure-15: Angstrom login

Preparing the microSD card

• First, download the latest Angstrom Linux image from the link below:[   http://dominion.thruhere.net/koen/angstrom/minnow/Angstrom-development-GNOME-image-eglibc-ipk-v2012.12-minnow-2013.06.04.img.xz]

• Next, download the 7-zip utility from the link below and install it:http://www.7-zip.org/download.html

• Decompress the previously downloaded Angstrom image using 7-zip as shown in Figure - 16 below. The resulting file should have an extension '.img' .

 Figure-16: Decompressing the image

• Now, install 'Image Writer for Windows' software from the link below:

http://sourceforge.net/projects/win32diskimager/files/latest/download 

• Insert the mirco SD card into the computer using an appropriate adapter. Next, launch the image writer software we just installed earlier. Select the Angstrom image and write it to the microSD card as shown in Figure - 17 below.

 Figure-17: Writing the image to microSD card



Resources

• Please refer the websites below for videos, tutorials, guides, projects etc. on the MinnowBoard:

1. http://www.minnowboard.org/

2. http://www.elinux.org/Minnowboard

3. http://www.angstrom-distribution.org/
